---
title: "Introduction"
categories:
  - Neuroscience 
excerpt: "What is computational neuroscience"
author_profile: false
sidebar:
    title: Computational Neuroscience
    nav: sidebar_CN
usemathjax: true
---



## Understanding the brain using computational models

- Descriptive models of the brain
  - How do neurons respond to external stimuli and how do we describe this quantitatively with a neural **encoding** model?
  - How can we extract information from neurons (**decoding**)?
- Mechanistic models of brain cells and networks
  - How can we **simulate** the behavior of a **single neuron** on a computer?
  - How do we simulate a **network** of neurons?
- Interpretive (or normative) models of the brain
  - Why do brain circuits operate the way they do?
  - What are the computational principles underlying their operation?

## What is computational neuroscience?

- The goal of computational neuroscience is to explain in computational terms **how brains generate behavior**
- Computational neuroscience provides tools and methods for characterizing what nervous systems do, determining how they function, and understanding why they operate in particular ways
  - Descriptive models (what)
  - Mechanistic models (how)
  - Interpretive models (why)

## Neuron doctrine

- The neuron is the fundamental structural and functional unit of the brain
- Neurons are discrete cells and not continuous with other cells
- Information flows from the dendrites to the axon via the cell body

## Long-Term Potentiation (LTP), Long-Term Depression (LTD)

1.  **Long-Term Potentiation (LTP):**
    - LTP is a process by which synaptic strength is increased following repeated stimulation of a synapse.
    - It involves a persistent increase in the efficacy of synaptic transmission, meaning that the postsynaptic neuron becomes more responsive to the presynaptic input.
    - LTP is often induced by high-frequency stimulation of the presynaptic neuron, leading to the activation of various signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms.
    - One of the key mechanisms underlying LTP involves the activation of NMDA receptors, which allow calcium ions to enter the postsynaptic neuron. Calcium influx triggers a cascade of events that ultimately lead to the strengthening of the synapse.
    - LTP is believed to be a cellular mechanism underlying learning and memory processes in the brain. It is thought to contribute to the formation of new memories and the strengthening of existing ones.
2.  **Long-Term Depression (LTD):**
    - LTD is the opposite process of LTP, resulting in a long-lasting decrease in synaptic strength.
    - It involves a persistent weakening of synaptic transmission, making the postsynaptic neuron less responsive to the presynaptic input.
    - LTD can be induced by low-frequency stimulation of the presynaptic neuron or by the activation of specific neurotransmitter receptors.
    - Similar to LTP, the mechanisms underlying LTD involve changes in synaptic efficacy mediated by alterations in neurotransmitter release, receptor trafficking, and synaptic structure.
    - While LTP is associated with the strengthening of synapses and the formation of memories, LTD is thought to be involved in synaptic pruning, which is the elimination of unnecessary or weak synaptic connections. This process is crucial for refining neural circuits during development and for synaptic plasticity in the adult brain.

## Peripheral nervous system (PNS)

- Somatic: nerves connecting to voluntary skeletal muscles and sensory receptors
  - Afferent nerve fibers: axons that carry info away from the periphery to the CNS
  - Efferent nerve fibers: axons that carry info from the CNS outward to the periphery
- Autonomic: nerves that connect to the heart, blood vessels, smooth muscles, and glands

## Central nervous system (CNS)

- Spinal cord + Brain
- Spinal cord
  - local feedback loops control reflexes
  - descending motor control signals from the brain, activate spinal motor neurons
  - ascending sensory axons convey sensory information from muscles and skin back to the brain
- Brain
  - The hindbrain
    - Medulla Oblongata: controls breathing, muscle tone and blood pressure
    - Pons: connected to the cerebellum and involved in sleep and arousal
    - Cerebellum: coordination and timing of voluntary movements, sense of equilibrium, language, attention
  - Midbrain and reticular formation
    - Midbrain: eye movements, visual and auditory reflexes
    - Reticular formation: modulates muscle reflexes, breathing and pain perception. regulates sleep, wakefulness, arousal
  - Thalamus and hypothalamus
    - Thalamus: relay station for all sensory info (except smell) to the cortex, regulate sleep/wakefulness
    - Hypothalamus: regulates basic needs - fighting, fleeing, feeding and mating
  - Cerebrum
    - Cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, hippocampus, and amygdala
    - Involved in perception and motor control, cognitive functions, emotion, memory, and learning
    - Cerebral cortex: a layered sheet of neurons
      - convoluted surface of cerebrum, about 1/8 of an inch thick
      - approximately 30 billion neurons
      - each neuron makes about 10,000 synapses, approximately 300 trillion connections in total
      - Six layers of neurons
        - relatively uniform in structure: is there a common principle operating across cortex?
        - Input 4, output to higher areas 2/3, input from higher areas 1, output to subcortical regions 5,6
